.. vim: syntax=rst

Chapter 3 Characterize baseline quantities of interest, uncertainties
=====================================================================

This Chapter provides an overview and guidance on the following topics:

-  Observation-based water cycle data sets for North America and their
   strengths and weaknesses

-  Characterizing baseline natural variability and introduction to the
   attribution of observed changes

**Table of Contents**

-  Introduction

   -  Weather and climate

   -  Natural factors influencing climate variability

-  Observational datasets and their strengths and weaknesses

-  Baseline natural variability and detection and attribution of
   observed changes

-  Key takeaways from the chapter

-  References

**Introduction**

In any study on future impacts of climate change, it is essential to
first characterize and quantify the baseline or starting point of the
study area of interest, which includes understanding the natural
variability of the water system being studied, independent of
anthropogenic impacts (e.g. due to, say, changes in radiative forcing
due to changes in CO2 emissions, land-use changes, etc.). In addition,
when using future numerical-based climate modeling outputs, some form of
bias correction using local observations is also essential for making
the results physically-relevant, as well as making the climate model
outputs applicable as inputs into local impact models. The first part of
this chapter discusses observational data sources that would be relevant
for both of these topics. Note that our coverage of climate variables in
this primer is primarily on the atmospheric “flux” terms into and out of
the surface (see figure below) of the hydrologic cycle components:
precipitation and the climate variables that impact evapotranspiration
(temperature, solar insolation, long wave radiation, wind speed,
relative humidity); this is in contrast to those variables that are
subsurface variables, and those that are more “point-based” and
diagnosed through local impact model research (e.g. streamflow, sediment
transport, storage, etc.).

|image1|

*The components of the hydrologic cycle*

In the second section of this chapter we discuss the concept of the
baseline natural variability of a system under study, and ways to detect
and potentially attribute the contribution of observed changes to
natural and anthropogenic factors. Because climate change is a
phenomenon that is typically characterized by slow changes through time,
and that anthropogenic-induced climate change predominantly began in the
mid-19th century (when atmospheric concentrations of CO2 began to show a
marked increase correlating with industrial activities), significant
changes may be detected through examination of the historical record,
depending on the study area. At the same time, detection depends on how
large the “natural variability” of the system of interest is. The
Earth's climate systems exhibit natural variability due to a range of
factors. These include variations in solar radiation (e.g. solar
cycles), volcanic activity, ocean currents, atmospheric circulation
patterns such as El Niño and La Niña, and geological processes like the
shifting of tectonic plates (at time-scales of millions of years).
Additionally, feedback mechanisms within the Earth's climate system can
amplify or dampen these variations, leading to fluctuations in
temperature, precipitation patterns, and other climatic parameters over
different timescales, from years to centuries and beyond. The figure
below from the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC:
https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar6/syr/figures/figure-2-1) shows on the left
panel the increase in the global surface temperature through time, while
the panel at the right shows estimates of how much these temperature
changes have been attributed to total human influence; solar and
volcanic drivers; and internal climate variability. Although at the
global scale, human impacts are the dominant contributor to these
changes, natural variability generally becomes relatively a much larger
contributor to observed changes as the spatial region of interest gets
smaller, and as the timescales of interest also decrease.

|image2|

*Figure: :mark:`Left panel: the global surface temperature (shown as
annual anomalies from a 1850–1900 baseline) has increased by around
1.1°C since 1850–1900. Right panel: temperature change attributed to:
total human influence; its decomposition into changes in greenhouse gas
(GHG) concentrations and other human drivers (aerosols, ozone and
land-use change (land-use reflectance)); solar and volcanic drivers; and
internal climate variability. Whiskers show likely ranges. Source:`
IPCC: https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar6/syr/figures/figure-2-1.*

Further below we provide introductory information on the distinction of
weather and climate (i.e. differences in what are often termed “time
scales of interest”) and a description of the natural factors that
influence our climate over time.


.. dropdown:: **Weather vs Climate**

    Most of us know that climate and weather are not the same. It is sometimes said, "Climate is what you expect, weather is what you get."

    **Weather** describes the details of what we experience over the course of hours and days.

    |image3|

    **Climate** is the statistical representation of weather over days, months, seasons, years, decades and longer

    |image4|

    **A weather prediction, or forecast,** describes the near-term likelihood of a weather event such as a specific occurrence of rain or snow and/or the expected change in temperature. A weather forecast, for example, might read, "colder with a 70% chance of snow this afternoon."

    **A climate prediction**, on the other hand, might call for below average precipitation and near average temperature over the next 30 days.`

    **Climate model output:** used to generate statistics of weather phenomena`

      -Mean and variability of precipitation and temperature

      -Collective impact of weather events

    **Projections:** Lack specificity and predictability

    Climate models do predict specific weather events many years into the future, but not with the intention for use as time and site-specific forecasts. Rather, the intended use of climate model output is to generate statistics of weather phenomena, such as means and variability of precipitation or temperature, and thus to characterize the collective impact of weather events. These climate predictions are typically referred to as projections, or simulations, and lack the short-term specificity of weather predictions.`

.. dropdown:: *Natural factors impacting climate variability**
    Earth's climate shifts over time because so many different land, ocean, and space phenomena have a hand in it. The sun is the main driver of Earth's climate, as it provides most of the energy. The sun's energy output increased about a tenth of a percent from 1750 to 1950, which contributed about 0.2°F (0.1°C) warming in the first part of the 20th century. But since 1979, when we began taking measurements from space, the data show no long-term change in total solar energy, even though Earth has been warming.

|Graphic showing Milankovitch cycles|

    Repetitive cycles in Earth's orbit can influence the angle and timing of sunlight. The tilt and wobble of Earth's axis and the degree to which its orbit is stretched produce the Milankovitch cycles, which scientists believe triggered and shut off ice ages for the last few million years. But these changes take thousands of years, and so cannot explain the warming in this century.

|Graphic showing continental drift|

*Click to open a drifting continents & ocean currents animation.*

    Drifting continents make a big difference in climate over millions of years by changing ice caps at the poles and by steering ocean currents, which transport heat and cold throughout the ocean depths. These currents in turn influence atmospheric processes. Snow and ice on Earth also affect climate because they reflect more solar energy than darker land cover or open water.

|Global average surface temperature change with volcanic eruptions|

    Huge volcanic eruptions can cool Earth by injecting ash and tiny particles into the stratosphere. The resulting haze shades the sun for a year or two after each major blast. Dust and tiny particles thrown into the air by both natural processes and human activities can have a similar effect, although some absorb sunlight and help heat the climate.

|Incoming solar radiation and the effect of increasing greenhouse gases|

    Greenhouse gases, which occur both naturally and as a result of human activities, also influence Earth's climate.

.. |Graphic showing Milankovitch cycles| image:: media/ch3/image_intro_popout_natl2.jpg
   :width: 6.5in
   :height: 4.875in
.. |Graphic showing continental drift| image:: media/ch3/image_intro_popout_natl3.jpg
   :width: 6.5in
   :height: 4.875in
.. |Global average surface temperature change with volcanic eruptions| image:: media/ch3/image_intro_popout_natl1.gif
   :width: 5.73611in
   :height: 2.61111in
.. |Incoming solar radiation and the effect of increasing greenhouse gases| image:: media/ch3/image_intro_popout_natl4.jpg
   :width: 6.5in
   :height: 4.875in




.. |image1| image:: media/ch3/image_intro1.jpg
   :width: 5.20833in
   :height: 3.64583in
.. |image2| image:: media/ch3/image_intro2.png
   :width: 6.5in
   :height: 3.40278in
.. |image3| image:: media/ch3/image_intro_popout_weather2.png
   :width: 6.25in
   :height: 4.58333in
.. |image4| image:: media/ch3/image_intro_popout_weather1.png
   :width: 6.25in
   :height: 4.58333in
