.. vim: syntax=rst

**Natural Factors**
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Earth's climate shifts over time because so many different land, ocean,
and space phenomena have a hand in it. The sun is the main driver of
Earth's climate, as it provides most of the energy. The sun's energy
output increased about a tenth of a percent from 1750 to 1950, which
contributed about 0.2°F (0.1°C) warming in the first part of the 20th
century. But since 1979, when we began taking measurements from space,
the data show no long-term change in total solar energy, even though
Earth has been warming.

|Graphic showing Milankovitch cycles|

Repetitive cycles in Earth's orbit can influence the angle and timing of
sunlight. The tilt and wobble of Earth's axis and the degree to which
its orbit is stretched produce the Milankovitch cycles, which scientists
believe triggered and shut off ice ages for the last few million years.
But these changes take thousands of years, and so cannot explain the
warming in this century.

|Graphic showing continental drift|

*Click to open a drifting continents & ocean currents animation.*

Drifting continents make a big difference in climate over millions of
years by changing ice caps at the poles and by steering ocean currents,
which transport heat and cold throughout the ocean depths. These
currents in turn influence atmospheric processes. Snow and ice on Earth
also affect climate because they reflect more solar energy than darker
land cover or open water.

|Global average surface temperature change with volcanic eruptions|

Huge volcanic eruptions can cool Earth by injecting ash and tiny
particles into the stratosphere. The resulting haze shades the sun for a
year or two after each major blast. Dust and tiny particles thrown into
the air by both natural processes and human activities can have a
similar effect, although some absorb sunlight and help heat the climate.

|Incoming solar radiation and the effect of increasing greenhouse gases|

Greenhouse gases, which occur both naturally and as a result of human
activities, also influence Earth's climate.

.. |Graphic showing Milankovitch cycles| image:: media/ch3/image_intro_popout_natl2.jpg
   :width: 6.5in
   :height: 4.875in
.. |Graphic showing continental drift| image:: media/ch3/image_intro_popout_natl3.jpg
   :width: 6.5in
   :height: 4.875in
.. |Global average surface temperature change with volcanic eruptions| image:: media/ch3/image_intro_popout_natl1.gif
   :width: 5.73611in
   :height: 2.61111in
.. |Incoming solar radiation and the effect of increasing greenhouse gases| image:: media/ch3/image_intro_popout_natl4.jpg
   :width: 6.5in
   :height: 4.875in
