

Further Reading
========

**Learn More: Introduction to Climate Models**
-------------------------------------------------------------

Introduction
~~~~~~~~~~~~

|CCSM3 Simulation of Water Vapor (white) and Precipitation (orange) for
April|

– popout Ch4 Intro movie1 ccsm3_apr.mp4

Weather forecasters depend on numerical weather prediction (NWP) models
to produce timely, accurate forecasts. We depend on these forecasts to
make all manner of decisions from recreation choice to emergency
response. As a community, weather forecasters understand the strengths
and weaknesses of NWP models better than just about any other group.
Every forecaster knows, for example, that model skill drops sharply with
time and that NWP models struggle to produce accurate and precise
forecasts more than a week into the future.

Climate models share a common heritage with NWP models. For example,
this animation shows water vapor and precipitation for a period of
several days. We see the same weather patterns produced by NWP models
and observed in satellite images. In a climate simulation, the model
would run for decades or centuries, rather than days. As a result,
forecasters frequently wonder how a climate model can produce an
accurate projection decades or centuries in the future, when NWP models
cannot produce an accurate forecast at 10 days. The answer lies in the
questions the respective models seek to address.

This module explains how climate models work. We explain not only how,
but why climate models differ from weather models.

We have attempted to restrict the scope of this module to climate
models, rather than climate science. We do however, draw upon climate
science to illuminate the questions that climate models answer and to
illustrate concepts with data from models and observations. For example,
we do not attempt to explain the mechanics of El Nino-Southern
Oscillation (ENSO), but we show examples of observations and model
simulations of ENSO phenomena.

**Why Model the Earth System?**


|Satellite imagery of the great flood of the Mississippi River, 1993 in
the area around St. Louis, MO comparing August 1991 and 1993.|

**Why do we model the climate system?**

Since the start of the Industrial Revolution, greenhouse gases,
principally carbon dioxide, have increased substantially in the
atmosphere. The past several decades have seen a significant rise in
global surface temperatures. The climate change associated with this
warming may have profound impacts for society. For example, the
frequency of extreme events, like the flooding that struck the midwest
in 1993, may increase with a high toll on society.

|Observed Surface Winds, Ocean Temperatures, and Currents across the
Equatorial Pacific, Oct 2006 to Sep 2011|

– popout Ch4 Intro movie2 sst-wind-cur-eqt-20c.mp4

Understanding how climate changes in response to changes in the
composition of the atmosphere and other factors drives climate research.
Climate models provide a tool to understand how processes work and
interact with each other. For example, El Nino/Southern Oscillation
(ENSO) is a mode of climate variability that strongly influences weather
in North America and beyond. It results from a complex interaction of
atmosphere and ocean. This animation shows observed winds, ocean
temperatures, and currents across the Equatorial Pacific through five
years of an ENSO cycle. Successfully modeling the complex interactions
that result in ENSO allows researchers to understand the roles of the
processes involved and how they interact.

|Photo of the Shasta Dam|

We also use models as a tool to look into the future, just as we use
weather forecast models to make predictions. Both weather and climate
models provide information for societal needs. For example, planning for
future water and hydrologic needs requires looking far into the future.
Building a dam, like the Shasta Dam shown here, requires a long lead
time.

**Global Energy Flows**


|Global Energy Flows (W/m2)|

– popout Ch4 Intro movie3 climate_energy_flows.mp4

Solar energy drives the Earth's climate system. Based on measurements
from satellites and other instruments, we can trace the flow of energy
through the climate system. Note that the numbers are best estimates in
Watts per square meter as of 2009. We can expect these numbers to change
as our observations and understanding improve.

Energy comes into the climate system as shortwave solar radiation. Some
of that energy reflects off clouds and the atmosphere back to space.
Some more is absorbed by the atmosphere.

The rest makes its way to the surface, where most is absorbed but some
is also reflected. The difference between the incoming and the reflected
energy is the total available to the Earth's climate system. About
two-thirds of that is absorbed by the surface, while the rest is
absorbed by the atmosphere.

Solar energy absorbed at the surface warms the surface, which radiates
thermal, or longwave, radiation.

Some of that radiation makes it directly out to space through the
so-called atmospheric window and some more is absorbed by clouds. There
are also greenhouse gases in the atmosphere, particularly water vapor
and carbon dioxide, that very efficiently absorb longwave radiation and
radiate it.

Greenhouse gases radiate in all directions so that some radiated energy
is directed upward toward space, with the remainder directed downward
toward the surface.

Radiative transfer isn't the only way that energy moves between the
surface and the atmosphere. The surface also loses energy through
evapotranspiration from plants and wet surfaces (latent heat), and
through conduction (sensible heat).

Climate models need to account for all the processes that modulate this
flow of energy. For example, clouds reflect, absorb, and radiate energy.
Therefore, the cloud processes need to be accurately simulated in
climate models. Similarly, vegetation strongly modulates energy flow by
affecting albedo and evapotranspiration.

**Earth's Atmospheric Dynamics**


|The Tropics defined by upward motion, low pressure, surface winds, and
net surface heating|

Incoming solar radiation is much stronger near the equator than near the
poles. Atmospheric circulations develop in response to this unequal
distribution. These circulations attempt to equalize this distribution
by moving heat from warmer to colder regions. Climate models have to
account for these large-scale circulations, such as Hadley cells, and
the convective heating shown in this figure.

**Storm Systems**


|Composite IR Satellite Image Loop 00 UTC 17 Mar 2012 to 12 UTC 20 Mar
2012|

– popout Ch4 Intro movie4 global_ir_loop.mp4

Furthermore, embedded within these planetary scale circulations are
smaller-scale features that we call storm systems. They transport
significant amounts of heat and energy around the planet. This loop of
composite infrared satellite images shows storm systems pinwheeling
across the globe at high latitudes. Note how the storms draw warm,
moist, tropical air toward the poles.

`Top of
page <https://www.meted.ucar.edu/nwp/climate_models/print.htm#header>`__

**Earth's Heat Transport**


|Meridional Atmosphere and Ocean Heat Transports|

The result of long-term climatological circulation and short-term storm
systems is the net transport of heat from low latitudes to high
latitudes. This figure, based on observations, shows the total amount of
energy (in petawatts or quadrillions of watts) that's transported toward
both poles by the atmosphere, shown in green, and by the ocean, shown in
red. While the atmosphere transports most of the heat out of the tropics
and toward the poles, the ocean also plays a significant role. Thus
climate models need to simulate oceanic processes in addition to
atmospheric ones.

Predictability of Weather and Climate
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

**Weather versus Climate**


The key difference between weather and climate is really a matter of
time scale.

-  Weather is what we experience over the course of hours, days, and
   weeks.

-  Climate is the average of weather over years, decades, and longer.

Or, as the old adage goes: climate is what you expect, weather is what
you get.

Forecast models are used to predict specific weather events. To do that,
they start with the initial conditions and simulate how those conditions
will evolve with time. Getting the initial conditions right turns out to
be very important in forecasting weather events. The goal of those who
develop and use these weather forecast models is to predict weather with
enough accuracy to help those who may be affected by it.

On the other hand, climate models are used to generate the statistics
(such as the mean and variability) of weather phenomena, not predict the
time and place at which the phenomena will occur. So, while climate
models simulate weather phenomena, they are not dependent on initial
atmospheric conditions to the extent that weather forecast models are.
Initial ocean conditions can affect the simulated climate over the
course of several years (eg. El Nino/La Nina) to a decade or more.

**Initial Condition vs Boundary Condition**


-|Schamatic animation illustrating the difference between initial
condition problem (ensemble drift and spread) and boundary condition
problem (seasonality)|

– popout Ch4 Intro movie5 initial_boundary.mp4

In modeling terms, the difference between weather and climate is what we
call an initial condition problem versus a boundary condition problem.
Initial conditions are the starting point, the initial state of
variables like wind, temperatures, pressure, and moisture. Boundary
conditions, in contrast, are values prescribed by the modeler. Examples
include the intensity of solar radiation and composition of the
atmosphere. Weather depends on initial conditions, while climate on
decadal and longer time scales depends primarily on boundary conditions.

Imagine we are looking at two forecast model runs starting from the same
initial value, representative of the spring or fall season in either the
Northern or Southern Hemisphere: Let's force one set of forecasts with
summer incoming solar radiation. The result is a prediction of
temperature that oscillates up and down and gradually warms.

Now take that model and run it several more times with summer solar
forcing, starting each run with slightly different initial conditions,
just like weather forecasters do with model ensembles. The forecasts
diverge with time, but stay within some gradually warming forecast
envelope. The details of the forecast, just like weather, depend
critically upon the initial conditions of the model run.

Next, repeat the process, but use winter solar forcing. It quickly
becomes clear that the summer state is significantly warmer than the
winter state.

The variance within the summer and winter ensembles results from slight
changes in the initial conditions.

The difference between the summer and winter forecasts, or seasonality,
results from a difference in boundary conditions.

|animation of Earth orbiting Sun to explain seasons|

– popout Ch4 Intro movie6 seasons.mp4

If this were a location in the U.S., we know that it will be warmer in
the summer, on average, than in the winter. The boundary condition that
differs from summer to winter is the intensity and daily amount of
incoming solar radiation reaching the Earth's surface, which is directly
related to the tilt of the Earth with respect to the sun. Seasonality is
a boundary condition. The Northern Hemisphere gets more sunlight in
summer than in winter.

|Evolution of a model variable and forecast error during model
integration|

On the other hand, the drift and spread between different forecasts
within the summer and winter ensembles reflects a difference in initial
conditions. This graphic illustrates how model forecasts continually
drift away from the true state of the atmosphere. As a result,
forecasters frequently re-initialize weather models to better match
current observations, typically several times per day.

For climate models, it's the boundary conditions that matter.
Initialization does not affect the long-term statistics that the models
are designed to generate for periods of decades to centuries.

**Prediction vs Projection**


Another way to look at weather versus climate is looking at it as a
forecast challenge.

|Schematic diagram illustrating the difference between weather
prediction and climate projection|

– popout Ch4 Intro movie7 prediction_projection.mp4

Weather forecasters have a strong grasp of the fundamental mechanics of
their task. If you know the initial conditions, you can predict how the
weather is going to evolve for some time going forward. This is why so
much effort is expended obtaining and assimilating observations for
numerical weather prediction. And by extension, a crucial step in the
forecast process is to evaluate the model initialization by comparing
the model analysis against current observations.

Making an ENSO forecast or a seasonal outlook of precipitation is
structurally no different than making a daily weather forecast. Why?
Because they both assume you have a good understanding of how the basic
system works. And because you know how it works, if you know the initial
conditions, you can predict how it's going to vary going forward for
some time into the future. Whether that's a 24-hr forecast or a seasonal
outlook, it's structurally the same. The objective of such a forecast is
the same, too: to produce a prediction for a given location for a given
time period.

But there's a limit to predictability. You've undoubtedly heard of
Lorenz's Butterfly: the allegory of how the flap of the butterfly's
wings over Brazil leads to a thunderstorm a week later. Small
differences in the initial conditions, things we can't even measure,
will grow and contaminate the solution for a forecast. As a result,
forecasters can't predict if there will be snow on New Year's day or
rain on the summer solstice next year. That's not because the weather
model is no good, or we don't understand the physics well enough. It's
due to the chaotic nature of the system.

When it comes to longer-term climate problems, those determined over
decades to centuries, it's a different challenge. We're not interested
whether in the year 2083 we're going to have El Nino or La Nina, so the
initial conditions don't concern us. We're interested in how the
statistics of the climate system will change in response to changing
boundary conditions.

Using our knowledge of how the climate system works, we want to know how
factors that change the flow of energy will change the climate
statistics. If the sun gets brighter, incoming energy increases. If the
amount of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere increases, it changes how the
atmosphere absorbs infrared radiation and, hence, changes the flow of
energy through the system. If forest, which is dark, is replaced by
crops and pastures that are brighter, the surface albedo changes. These
are all examples of changes in boundary conditions. The physics are the
same as those in weather prediction, but we're solving a different
problem.

To distinguish between the questions addressed by weather and climate
models, scientists use different terms. Projection refers to how the
statistics of the climate system will change in response to changing
boundary conditions. Prediction refers to the short-term evolution of
the climate system from an initial state under constant boundary
conditions.

**Boundary Conditions**


Boundary conditions in climate models all affect the way that energy is
absorbed or exchanged in the climate system. Boundary conditions are not
predicted by the model and must be specified. Some boundary conditions
are natural, and others are influenced by human activities.

What are the boundary conditions in climate models?

|Global Volcanic and Solar Forcing 1850-2000 Used in the Third
Paleoclimate Model Intercomparison Project (PMIP3)|

Natural boundary conditions include solar radiation and volcanic
aerosols. Total solar insolation, observed at the top of the atmosphere,
has varied by about 2 W/m2 around an average of about 1361 W/m2 over the
past 1150 years. Large volcanic eruptions episodically inject large
quantities of aerosols into the atmosphere, which reflects incoming
solar radiation.

**Natural forcing: How do we know?**

|Photo of Antarctic Ice Core with Prominent Ash Layer|

Records of volcanic activity used to model past climate come from ice
cores in the Arctic and Antarctic. For example, Gao et al. (2008)
developed an index based on volcanic deposits in 54 ice core records.
Based on the spatial distribution of the deposits and knowledge of
stratospheric transport, they produced a volcanic forcing dataset as a
function of month, latitude, and altitude for the past 1500 years.

The primary source of information on solar activity (before direct
measurements were made) comes from concentrations of carbon-14, which is
formed in the atmosphere by the collision of nitrogen-14 and cosmic rays
from the sun. The carbon-14 is incorporated into plant material, where
it slowly decays back to nitrogen-14. By measuring the carbon-14
concentration in trees that are well dated through their tree rings, and
then accounting for the radioactive decay of carbon-14, we can determine
the past concentration of carbon-14 in the atmosphere. From this, we can
deduce the solar irradiance over time.

|Global Land Use Forcing 1850-2000 Used in the Third Paleoclimate Model
Intercomparison Project (PMIP3)|

Human-influenced boundary conditions include changes at the surface and
changes in the atmosphere. At the surface, cutting forest for pasture
and crops changes surface reflectivity and moisture, heat, and momentum
exchanges between land and atmosphere.

**Land use: How do we know?**

|Global historical cropland area (% of grid cell)|

– popout Ch4 Intro movie8 global_historical_cropland.mp4

Land use reconstructions for times prior to the 20th century are based
on population estimates and historical relationships of land use for
different population densities. The calculations are done
country-by-country to account for regional differences like crop types,
farming technology, and diet. All the reconstruction methods largely
rely on the similar historical population estimates. The results are
gridded maps of land use through time.

|Global Greenhouse Gas Forcing 1850-2000 Used in the Third Paleoclimate
Model Intercomparison Project (PMIP3)|

In the atmosphere, the most important changes are those that affect
greenhouse gases. Greenhouse gases, principally water vapor and carbon
dioxide, keep Earth habitable by absorbing enough long-wave radiation to
keep surface temperatures tens of degrees Celsius warmer than they would
be otherwise. These graphs show a rapid rise in different greenhouse
gases over the past 2 centuries, primarily due to burning of fossil
fuels.

Human emissions of atmospheric aerosols also alter the Earth's energy
balance. Depending on the composition of the aerosols and where they
are, they contribute to both warming and cooling of the climate.
Overall, aerosols are thought to contribute a cooling effect equal to
about half of the warming caused by greenhouse gases when averaged over
the globe.

**Greenhouse gases: How do we know?**

|Photo of ice core section with bubbles|

The concentration of greenhouse gases for climate reconstructions is
based on measurements of the composition of air bubbles preserved in
glacial ice in Antarctica. This photograph shows air bubbles trapped
from an ice core from Antarctica. The prolonged darkness in winter and
prolonged sunlight in summer leads to easily recognized and counted
annual layers in the ice, yielding a high-resolution record of changes
in atmospheric composition.

Building a Climate System Model
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
**Physical Basis of Weather and Climate Models**


|Portraits of Sir Issac Newton, Rudolf Clausius, Arthur Schuster, Lewis
Richardson, Vilhelm Bjerknes, John von Neumann|

The modeling of both weather and climate share a deep history and common
pedigree based on fundamental laws of physics whose discovery goes back,
in some cases, hundreds of years. The equations and calculation methods
used in the models can be traced back to the work of giants in the field
and direct applications of the fundamental laws of physics, such as

-  Sir Isaac Newton’s laws of motion,

-  Rudolf Clausius’ 1st law of thermodynamics, and

-  Arthur Schuster’s governing equations of radiative transfer.

These scientists deduced the basic laws of physics that are the basis of
any good climate and weather model.

In the 20th century, scientists applied these fundamental laws to the
atmosphere:

-  Vilhelm Bjerknes, who wrote the equations that we use to forecast the
   wind in weather and climate models,

-  Lewis Richardson, the father of numerical weather forecasting, and

-  John von Neumann, who led the first team of scientists that
   successfully ran a numerical forecast model on a computer.

From this lineage we can see how weather and climate models developed
from a common heritage, rooted in fundamental physics. Some people, when
they hear the word “model”, believe that the equations used to describe
physical processes are loosely constrained and can be easily “tweaked”
to get whatever answer the modeler wants. That is not the case.

**Resolved Dynamical Processes**

|Gridded globe with zoomed in section|

To directly simulate processes in Earth’s climate system, we need to
create a set of equations using the fundamental laws of physics. These
are called the equations of motion or primitive equations, and are used
by both climate and NWP models. These equations balance forces acting in
three dimensions, conserve mass, and track the temperature of each grid
box. There are also equations that track the amount of moisture and
other trace products that move in and out of grid boxes.

To solve these equations for Earth, we create a grid structure on which
to make the calculations. This structure involves vertical columns of
air sliced into horizontal layers over the full Earth for global models,
or a portion of it for regional models. Finally, we solve the equations
at the center point of each model grid box, at fixed, predetermined time
intervals.

Early climate and weather models had grid cells that measured 300-400 km
on a side. As of 2012, the NWP models have grid boxes as small as 1.5 km
on a side or even a little less. Climate models are now run at a
resolution as high as about 50 km.

**Sub-grid Scale Processes and Parameterization**

Even in high resolution models, some weather and climate processes are
too small in scale to be calculated directly, and always will be, even
though their impacts are important to weather and climate systems. These
sub-grid scale processes, such as cumulus convection and radiative
transfer of solar and longwave radiation, indirectly affect the climate
and weather variables (the "resolved" variables) calculated on the grid.
These indirect effects are determined by what is called
"parameterization".

|Graph showing growth by condensation growth and collision-coalescence
growth plus Animation of collision-coalescence|

– popout Ch4 Intro movie9 ccprcess_graph_plus_anim.mp4

Parameterizations are designed using observations and the laws of
physics; they are not a "best guess". Take the example of a model
representation of cloud microphysics. Conservation laws dictate the mass
of water going in and out of a grid box. Vapor in the model condenses
according to observationally based thresholds of relative humidity,
forming "clouds". Physical processes lead from clouds to the formation
of droplets that then fall to grid boxes below as rain or snow, also
based on observational evidence from within clouds.

Thus, the parameterization of clouds, although subject to many unknowns,
is based on a combination of the conservation of mass and energy and an
empirical understanding of cloud formation, grounded in observations.
Using those properties, modelers create parameterizations for cloud
processes that operate within model grid layers when appropriate
environmental conditions are met.

Parameterizations do bring with them uncertainty. Some processes are
better understood than others. But this is true of all model processes.
Even the numerical representation of the laws of motion comes with
uncertainty. There is no unique way to write the numerical solutions for
resolved processes, like motion, and they all have some error associated
with them. This is equally true for both weather models and climate
models. Even so, uncertainty in weather and climate models is decreasing
as our understanding of climate and weather processes further improves
and computing power continues to increase.

.. _section-1:

**Climate Model Evolution**

|Loop of schematic images showing the Evolution of Climate Models|

– popout Ch4 Intro movie10 climate_model_history.mp4

With the development of digital computers in the 1950s, it became
theoretically possible to develop weather and climate models.
Forecasting short-range weather with NWP models got attention first.
Scientists only began to develop computerized climate models (also known
as general circulation models or GCMs) in the late 1960s to early 1970s,
but used the same equations as in NWP models.

Many details in early climate models (for example, sea surface
temperatures and land/sea ice) had to be set to fixed or seasonal values
because they could not be calculated: computational resources were
insufficient and/or the processes involved were not well understood.

As our physical understanding of ocean, land, and ice processes advanced
and computing power increased, scientists were able to add more climate
processes and improve existing ones. For instance, models that
realistically simulate overturning ocean circulation and its interaction
with the atmosphere replaced prescribed ocean surfaces. Realistic land
surface models replaced simple "bucket" models to better simulate
vegetation effects on moisture, momentum, and heat transfer between the
land and the atmosphere. The effect of aerosols, both natural and those
generated by human activities, was also added. The inclusion of aerosols
resulted in climate models capturing the temporary halt to increasing
average global temperature during the mid-20th century, an effect that
was not previously simulated.

More recently, scientists have added processes with long time scales or
complicated physics and chemistry. These include the carbon cycle,
atmospheric chemistry, and a biosphere capable of responding to model
climate change (for example, vegetation cover changing from tundra to
forest in response to predicted warming). Scientists have also added
interactions between land and sea ice and the rest of the climate model.

Some of the processes included in climate models are relatively
straightforward, while the impact of others needs to be more crudely
estimated because of their characteristic time or space scales. In the
next section, we will talk about how these processes are included in
climate models.

.. _section-2:

**Model components**

|Schamatic animation illustrating the climate model coupler|

The components that go into a climate model include an atmosphere model,
ocean model, land model (including snow and land ice), and sea ice
model. A coupler manages the interactions between the different
components, accommodating different grids, resolution, and time steps.

In contrast, NWP models mostly include just the atmosphere. The ocean,
land, and ice are prescribed quantities with values derived from current
satellite observations, climatology, or a mix of both. These values do
not change much over the course of a weather forecast period, so they
can be fixed.

.. _section-3:

**Atmospheric Model**

|Illustration of all processes and physical model elements that are
parameterized in numerical weather prediction models. Includes 20
different items, such as topography, deep convection, longwave radiation
absorption and emission, microphysical processes, land surface processes
and land use types, soil and vegetation processes, snow/water/ice at the
earth surface, atmospheric radiation transfer, etc.|

The atmospheric component of the climate model is very similar to a
numerical weather prediction model. The model solves for both resolved
processes, like motion, and parameterized processes, like cloud physics.

The model numerically solves the equations of motion at each grid point.
In other words, the model directly simulates motion in the atmosphere
between grid layers by balancing the pressure gradient force, Coriolis
effect, and forces resulting from curvature in the flow.

There are also parameterized dynamics for aspects of atmospheric flow
too small to resolve, such as gravity wave drag. We know from theory and
observations that mountains generate gravity waves that propagate up
into the atmosphere and transport momentum from the surface up into the
atmosphere. This affects elements of the larger-scale flow such as the
placement of the jet stream and storm tracks and the location and
strength of planetary scale atmospheric waves.

Most physical processes must be parameterized. These include the
following:

-  Radiative transfer, or how sunlight and long-wave radiation propagate
   up and down through the atmosphere.

-  Processes related to cloud formation resulting from both large-scale
   (resolved) lifting and from sub-grid scale convective processes.
   Traditionally, these processes have been hardest to parameterize.

-  Boundary layer and surface exchange processes that occur on scales
   much smaller than a typical grid box.

-  Dissipation of kinetic energy or momentum away from the boundary
   layer.

None of these processes are unique to climate models. Every weather
forecast model includes them, too. If you look "under the hood" of any
weather model, this is what you're going to find.

.. _section-4:

**Ocean Model**

|Processes Simulated by the Parallel Ocean Program|

In order to adequately simulate climate, models must include the ocean.
After all, most of the heat in the climate system is stored in the
ocean. Furthermore, much of the natural variability in the climate
system is controlled by oscillations in the ocean that are closely
coupled to the atmosphere.

In contrast, NWP models use set ocean conditions, typically using
satellite observations of sea surface temperatures, which are held
constant through the course of a model run.

There are several important differences between the ocean and atmosphere
that affect climate modeling:

-  Ocean processes operate over much longer time scales when compared to
   atmospheric processes. Complete mixing of the ocean takes centuries,
   and thus changes in forcing can take decades to appear in the ocean.

-  Ocean observations are sparse, which makes verification of model
   results more difficult. While satellites provide many observations of
   the surface, deep profiles come largely from drifting buoys that
   yield only about 300 profiles per day from the top 750 meters.

In many respects, ocean models are quite similar to atmospheric models;
the equations of motion are largely the same. There are, however, some
notable exceptions:

-  Ocean models are forced entirely at the surface

-  Ocean models need to account for salinity, which plays a large role
   in determining density

-  Surface currents are largely wind driven

Current climate models may now include an ocean ecosystem model. This
model can be used as a component of the global carbon cycle model. It
also enables a feedback from biogeochemistry to the ocean physics
whereby the calculated chlorophyll content impacts the absorption of
solar radiation in the ocean.

.. _section-5:

**Land Model**

|Processes Simulated by the Community Land Model 4.0|

Climate models also need to account for what's happening on land that
influences climate. Land processes play an important role in exchanges
of energy, moisture, and carbon with the atmosphere and ocean.

Land models have become far more sophisticated over the last 20 years.
In the “old days,” just 20 or 30 years ago, models accounted for things
like energy exchange between the atmosphere and land in very simple
ways. Land model developers have replaced these simple schemes with more
detailed simulations. Among other things, these simulations now account
for

-  Energy and water exchange between different types of vegetation,

-  Vegetation effects on wind flow,

-  Interactive ecosystems that evolve with changing climate conditions,

-  A complete water cycle with infiltration, aquifers, groundwater, and
   surface flow,

-  Water, carbon, and nitrogen exchanges between soil, plants, and
   atmosphere, and

-  Freshwater runoff into the ocean, which affects salinity, which can
   then affect circulation.

.. _section-6:

**Ice Models**

|Processes Simulated by the Community Ice CodE|

Ice plays an important role in the climate system due to its high
albedo. Ice-covered areas reflect a very high percentage of incoming
shortwave radiation. Thus the presence or absence of ice tends to have
an inordinately large effect on climate with large feedbacks in coupled
systems.

Sea ice forms from the freezing of seawater. Its presence or absence
strongly impacts climate, both globally and locally. In addition to the
albedo feedback described above, sea ice also acts as a barrier between
the liquid ocean and the atmosphere and thus strongly alters the
moisture flux, as well as latent and sensible heat fluxes. The formation
of sea ice also plays a crucial role in the formation of the cold,
saline water that drives deep ocean circulation.

In addition to the heat flux that results in freezing and melting, sea
ice models simulate features including sea ice motion, formation of
ridges and leads, melt ponds, and aerosol deposition.

|Processes Simulated by the Community Ice Sheet Model|

Dynamical ice sheet models simulate the mass and movement of ice that
forms on land. Land ice has proven more difficult to model than other
aspects of the climate system. While ice generally moves slowly,
glaciers and ice shelves can react swiftly under some circumstances.
Understanding what can trigger these rapid changes is crucial to
projections of sea level. If all the ice in Greenland and Antarctica
melted, sea level could rise about 70 meters. The resulting influx of
fresh water would likely disturb ocean circulation, further changing
climate.

.. _section-7:

Model Tuning
~~~~~~~~~~~~

**Why We Tune Models**

|Interactive graphic showing relationship between radiative balance and
cloud cover|

– popout Ch4 Intro movie11 cloud_tuning.mp4

When we simulate the climate system, we often want to run models for a
very long time. For meaningful results, we want no intrinsic drift in
global climate. In other words, with constant boundary conditions, the
simulated atmosphere/ocean/land system should neither warm nor cool over
a long period (except for internal variability). If the amount of energy
coming in equals that going out globally, there will be no tendency for
the model to drift, to warm or cool. It will be in a steady state,
resulting in a stable global control climate.

In a process akin to calibrating laboratory instruments to reduce
measurement errors, modelers "tune" the model to achieve a steady state
under constant boundary conditions. Once a stable control is
established, only then can they design experiments to answer questions
about the effects of changing those boundary conditions.

This interactive figure shows one way in which climate models can be
tuned to achieve a stable climate. Adjusting the relative humidity
threshold for cloud formation, one can increase or decrease the incoming
solar radiation that is reflected back to space. If there is too little
cloud cover, less incoming solar radiation will be reflected back to
space, allowing too much solar radiation reaching the surface. As a
result, the model climate will warm. With a long enough simulation, that
system will eventually reach a new balance, but the resulting climate
will be very warm.

NWP modelers investigating new operational NWP models also test, tune,
and retest the models until the skill score of a new model is the same
as or better than that of the old model.

.. _section-8:

**How We Tune Models**

|Summary of the principal components of the radiative forcing of climate
change|

How do we balance the incoming and outgoing radiation to achieve a
stable control climate? Usually modelers find a parameterization that
has a large effect on the energy budget within the range of
observational uncertainty. For example, this graphic shows the change in
magnitude of different forcing mechanisms since the start of the
industrial era, along with their associated uncertainty.

More typically, modelers choose a parameterization associated with cloud
cover. Because clouds reflect solar radiation back to space, the amount
of cloud cover strongly regulates the global energy budget. More clouds
reflect more sunlight, cooling the Earth. Less clouds allows more
sunlight to reach the surface, warming the Earth. We only have rough
estimates of the amount of liquid and ice in clouds, the rate at which
cloud particles are converted to precipitation, and the impact of clouds
on short- and longwave radiative transfer. This allows some latitude in
tuning the cloud parameterization to maintain energy balance for a fixed
climate model system.

Within the range of uncertainty, parameters within the cloud scheme are
adjusted to yield a more realistic energy budget. For example, the rate
at which water vapor is converted to cloud water or ice and eventually
to rain is not well-understood, with significant uncertainty. If less
vapor is eventually converted to rain, then more vapor remains in the
atmosphere contributing to cloud formation. Alternatively, more vapor
converted to rain tends to dry out the atmosphere, resulting in fewer
clouds overall.

Several important points need to be stressed about model tuning:

1. Tuning is done only within the statistical, physical, or dynamical
   uncertainty of the parameter. As our understanding of atmospheric
   processes increases, the uncertainty in parameterizations decreases,
   making it more difficult to tune models.

2. Tuning is done to achieve a stable control climate, not to reduce
   biases in model simulations. We reduce model bias by improving
   parameterization schemes and/or increasing model resolution.

3. Tuning is not confined to climate models. Weather forecast models are
   also tuned, though in a different way.

With weather forecast models, energy balance will have little effect
over the short duration of a forecast period. Instead, forecasters may
find that the timing or spatial distribution of a specific event is
poorly simulated. It could be rainfall amounts or frontal passage
associated with storm systems. So, in contrast with climate modelers,
forecasters tune weather models to reduce known biases. This is done by
experimenting with different parameterizations to identify the source of
the bias. For example, model developers may find that the convection
parameterization is biased. By changing parameters in the convection
scheme, or even replacing the convection scheme altogether, the model
may do a better job of simulating a specific type of event.

Both the climate and weather forecasting communities tune their models.
They're tuning them to improve them, and the tuning is done within the
range of uncertainty that exists in the observations.

.. _section-9:

Testing Climate System Models
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

**Model Skill**

|Time series (1981-2006) of Anomaly Correlation of ECMWF 500 hPa Height
Forecasts|

Once a climate model is tuned and running, it can be tested and
evaluated, much as weather models are. In both cases, model results are
compared to observations. And, in both cases, model skill has improved
significantly over the past thirty years.

Looking first at weather models, this figure from the European Centre
for Medium-Range Forecasts (ECMWF) shows forecast skill for their
medium-range NWP model since 1981. It depicts skill (measured by the
anomaly correlation) of the 500-mb height forecast for 3, 5, 7, and
10-days in advance. The top line in each color band is skill in the
Northern Hemisphere, and the bottom line is skill in the Southern
Hemisphere.

Two things are immediately apparent in the graph:

1. Model skill has increased over the years. For example, if you look at
   a 5-day forecast, model skill has improved from about 0.60 to about
   0.87 (where 1.0 is perfect correlation) over 30 years.

2. The model has until recently, been much more skillful in the Northern
   Hemisphere.

This difference in model skill resulted from better initial conditions
for weather forecasts in the Northern Hemisphere than the Southern
Hemisphere. Until recently, there were more observations in the Northern
Hemisphere. Now, satellite data is optimized and the initial conditions
have the same quality.

Note that while forecast skill has improved over the last 30 years, the
trend has flattened out since about 2003. This could be due to a variety
of reasons, including uncertainties in the initial conditions,
parameterization biases, and inherent weather predictability issues
resulting from internal atmospheric dynamics (i.e., chaos).

|Climate Skill Score for Each Version of CCM and CAM, Based on NMSE
[normalized mean square error, right] and SVR [scaled variance ratio,
left] for the 200-mb Height Field|

Climate models have skill scores similar to those for weather models.

This graphic shows a skill score for successive generations of the
atmospheric model component at NCAR over the past 30 years. It is based
on the 200-mb height field for the Northern Hemisphere and calculated as
one (1) minus the mean square error normalized to the variance of the
analyzed observations. The data show that skill has climbed steadily
from the very low skill score of the original Community Climate Model
(CCM0) in the early 1980s. But, similar to weather forecast models, the
skill score for climate models also seems to be flattening out. It is
possible that we may reaching some kind of limit on how skillful these
kinds of models can be.

Bias in Model Means
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

**SST**

|Difference between the SST in observations and (top) 2° run and
(bottom) 0.5° run of CCSM4 for 1990-1999|

Another way we can test climate models is to look at the spatial
distribution of bias in the mean model fields. These plots show the bias
in simulated sea surface temperatures from a fully coupled model, the
Community Climate System Model compared to the observed SST climatology.
The top plot is for a coupled system where the atmospheric model is run
at a nominally 2 degree resolution, about two hundred kilometers. The
bottom plot is for the same system, but we have increased the
atmospheric model resolution to 0.5 degree, including the winds forcing
the ocean model. The dynamics and physical parameterizations remain
unchanged.

Why?

Higher horizontal resolution increased temperature gradients, which
increased the strength of winds in these regions. This increased
upwelling of cold water to the surface, reducing the warm temperature
bias.

Note the large cold bias in the North Atlantic. It's still there even in
the 0.5 degree model.

Why?

Because it appears that this bias isn't sensitive to the resolution of
the atmospheric model, it is likely due to ocean processes. Preliminary
experiments have shown that a much higher resolution ocean model would
allow the ocean model to simulate a turnaround of the Gulf Stream as it
approaches Greenland. With this turn, the Gulf Stream warms these
regions, eliminating the cold bias.

.. _section-10:

**Sea Ice**

|Sea Ice Concentration (%) for 1981-2005. Top (a-b): Observed
Climatology from SSM/I/SSMR Satellites. Bottom (c-d): Ensemble Mean from
CCSM4 Model. Black Line is the Ice Edge from SSM/I/SSMR Data.|

The Arctic is an interesting place to examine model biases because the
climate exhibits strong feedback due to the high albedo of snow and ice.
These plots show sea ice concentration and extent from satellite
observations and the CCSM4 climate model for the period 1981-2005. The
annual sea ice maximum typically occurs in March, while the annual sea
ice minimum typically occurs in September.

.. _section-11:

**Precipitation**

|Global Mean Precipitation and Precipitation Bias in 1-degree and
2-degree CCSM4 Simulations|

– popout Ch4 Intro movie12 ccsm4_precip_bias.mp4

Biases still remain in climate models. One in particular is the
so-called double Intertropical Convergence Zone, or ITCZ, bias in
precipitation. In general, coupled climate models show excessive
tropical precipitation, which through ocean-atmosphere coupling, leads
to less precipitation in the equatorial Pacific. A drier equatorial bias
splits the wetter tropical Pacific into northern and southern bands,
giving rise to the apparent double ITCZ.

Comparing the bias for the 1-degree and 2-degree versions of the model,
we can see that increasing the model resolution has only a small effect
on the bias. Biases like the double ITCZ motivate researchers to improve
the parameterization schemes that lead to excessive tropical
precipitation.

|Precipitation Bias for GFS 96-120 hr Forecasts, June-August 2010,
Relative to CAM-OPI Precipitation from Rain Gauge Observations and
Satellite Estimates|

Note that NWP models produce similar biases. This graphic shows biases
produced by GFS 4-5 day forecasts for June through August, 2010. Even
over this brief period, a double ITCZ is apparent, along with excess
precipitation in the Himalaya. These and other features are similar to
those we saw in long-term simulations by climate models.

.. _section-12:

**Biases in Initialized Climate Models**

|ISCCP Mean Annual Frequency of Cloud Occurrence with Location of Cross
Section|

Another way to examine climate model bias is to run the model as a
forecast model. This has been done by initializing the climate model,
not from observations, but rather from re-analysis products. After
running the model for several days, researchers can examine how biases
develop as the simulation drifts away from the observed climatology
toward the model's steady-state climate.

In these simulations, researchers were looking at the bias in
tropospheric moisture and temperature over a transect from San Francisco
out to the Equatorial Pacific. Along this transect, the cloud regime
goes from low marine stratus near the California Coast to deep
convection near the Equator. Thus, this transect provides a way to
examine biases in a variety of cloud processes.

Note: ISCCP = International Satellite Cloud Climatology Project

|Forecast Error of Temperature and Specific Humidity Showing Rapid Drift
Toward Model Climatology|

The results are startling. These plots are vertical cross sections of
model bias relative to observed climatology for 1 day (left), 5 days
(center), and the long-term climate model mean (right). The top row of
plots shows temperature, while the bottom row shows moisture.

What you see, is that bias starts to build immediately and within 5 days
the forecast bias in temperature looks very similar to the long-term
climate bias. Similarly, the dry bias seen in the climatology near the
coast in the lower troposphere shows up in the forecast after 5 days.

This experiment provides researchers with a very powerful tool for
research. Why?

It takes a lot of computer time to run climate models for 10, 20, or
100s of years to look at biases. If the same bias shows up in a 5-day
initialized forecast, it enables us to very quickly analyze biases due
to physical parameterizations. We no longer have to run the model for
decades or centuries to look at some of the biases related to different
physical parameterizations. Rather, we track down the source of the bias
using a series of 5-day forecasts!

This experiment also very clearly shows how weather forecast models will
drift if they aren't re-initialized frequently to keep pulling them back
to observations. Model simulations drift very quickly into their own
biased state. Weather forecasters know this from looking at longer runs
of weather forecast models.

.. _section-13:

Natural Variability
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

**North Atlantic Oscillation**

|North Atlantic Oscillation|

Climate statistics encompass more than just the mean state for climate.
They also include measures of natural variability, including the
location, timing, and strength of oscillations within the climate
system. For example, fully coupled models generate variability on the
same time and spatial scales as ENSO, the North Atlantic Oscillation
(NAO), and Pacific Decadal variability, among others.

This is a plot of one mode of variability found in the climate system,
the North Atlantic Oscillation (NAO), which is a pressure oscillation
between the Arctic region and the subtropics. The plot on the left shows
the annual mean NAO in the real atmosphere from 1900 to 2008, while the
plot on the right shows the annual mean NAO in a fully coupled model
over a 109-year period. The results are strikingly similar.

|Positive and negative phases of the wintertime North Atlantic
Oscillation (NAO).|

It's important to note that this variability is not externally forced.
This is a natural mode of variability of the Earth's climate system that
happens to play a very important role for seasonal weather. Here we see
typical global weather patterns associated with positive and negative
modes of NAO.

|Photo of Snow in Barcelona, Spain|

From 2008 to 2011, a tendency toward a strongly negative phase of NAO
resulted in extremely cold winters in Europe. Having a climate model
generate this sort of variability is important because that variability
goes into the statistics of weather that comprise climate for the
Northern Hemisphere.

.. _section-14:

**ENSO**

|Sea-Surface Temperature Anomalies for the NiÃ±o 3.4 Region in
Observations, CCSM4 (1Â°), and CCSM3 (T85).|

A similar argument can be made for ENSO. We know that ENSO plays a very
important role in seasonal weather phenomena, especially in tropical
regions and some extratropical regions, especially in the cold season.
Therefore, getting a good simulation of ENSO leads to a more realistic
climate simulation and more robust climate statistics. This plot of SST
anomalies shows the improvement in both the magnitude and periodicity of
ENSO variability between the older CCSM3 and newer CCSM4 simulations.

Overall, it's very important to get a climate model that is not just
simulating mean temperature and moisture distribution, but also
simulating these various modes of variability.

.. _section-15:

Future Directions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

**Increased Model Complexity**

|Conceptual Model of Earth System Processes Operating on Timescales of
Decades to Centuries|

– popout Ch4 Intro diagram bretherton_diagram_large.jpg

About 30 years ago, Francis Bretherton developed this system flow chart
of the Earth's climate and biospheric cycles, which has forever become
known as the Bretherton diagram. When seeing this diagram for the first
time, the first reaction of many people is laughter: the diagram is so
very complex. It's got everything. It's got human impacts, it's got
volcanism, it's got space physics, it's got deep sea sediment cores, and
the solar system. Bretherton put everything in. This diagram could be
seen as a model roadmap; Bretherton's grand view of where models would
need to evolve. Indeed, they have been evolving in this direction over
the last 20 years.

One of the more significant additions from early efforts has been the
inclusion of ecosystem models. This includes a terrestrial ecosystem
component in the land model along with a marine ecosystem component in
the ocean model.

Why include ecosystems?

Most of the climate models of the last 20 years have specified the
amount of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere, not predicted it. It was
prescribed based on very good measurements of carbon dioxide, but there
has always been a goal to make carbon dioxide a predicted quantity. To
do that, models need to simulate the carbon cycle. Now many models are
being run that do not prescribe the amount of carbon dioxide in the
atmosphere. Instead, only emissions of carbon dioxide due to the burning
of fossil fuel are set. Then the model calculates how much carbon
dioxide remains in the atmosphere.

In addition to simulating the processes that make up the carbon cycle,
models now include chemistry that impacts atmospheric gas composition,
as well as aerosols and clouds. Adding complexity to models, like
atmospheric chemistry, ecosystems, and the carbon cycle, lets the model
do what the real climate system is doing: exchanging not only moisture
and energy between the surface and the atmosphere, but also carbon
dioxide.

.. _section-16:

**Increased Model Resolution**

|Average Precipitation Rate (mm/day) for North America 1996-2005 from
Willmott-Matsuura Climatology and 0.25-degree Resolution CCSM4|

The other revolution in climate simulation is increased model
resolution. As computers have gotten more and more powerful, models are
able to be run at higher and higher resolution. These plots show mean
annual precipitation for North America in mm/day. The top plot comes
from an observational data set over a 10-year period. The bottom plot
shows results from an atmospheric model run at a quarter-degree grid
spacing, using actual SSTs to capture the model response to processes
like ENSO. That's equivalent to about a 25-km grid box size, the same as
many weather forecast models. We can now run global models over decades
to centuries at the same spatial resolution as forecast models. And as
we can see here, models are beginning to capture not just the large,
general features of precipitation, but even details down to small
scales.

And models have been run down to even finer resolution. One of these
images is the result of a climate model initialized with observations,
like a forecast model, and run at 5-km resolution to simulate a
particular storm system. The other image is the satellite observation of
the actual storm system.

So not only are models getting more complex, but there is a
parallel path wherein models are being run with increasing horizontal
resolution, in both the atmosphere and the ocean. In general, the more
we increase resolution, the more improvement we see in the model
simulations. However, not all model fields are improving with increased
resolution, and increasing resolution further may not yield significant
improvement. Biases still remain, but many are now clearly related to
parameterization schemes.

.. _section-17:

**The Goal**

Eventually climate and weather modelers would like to merge
increased resolution and added complexity and run the most complete
models at 10 to 20 km resolution with the most accurate parameterization
schemes.

There are still biases in models. There will always be biases in
models. But the models are grounded in basic physics and they're tested
against multiple data sets of observations, in terms of both the mean
and the variability. Thirty years ago atmosphere-only models were run
with prescribed sea surface temperatures. Now we're running fully
coupled Earth system models for thousands of years, and the models keep
getting better.

.. _section-18:

**Summary**
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The modeling of both weather and climate share a deep history and
common pedigree based on fundamental laws of physics. The key difference
between climate and weather models lies not in the models themselves,
but in the questions they seek to answer. Weather models predict how
weather will evolve from an initial state for a particular place and
time. Climate models project how the statistics of the climate system
will respond to changes in external forcing (i.e., boundary
conditions).

For the climate system to be in a steady state, the long-term
average energy coming in must balance the long-term energy going out.
Boundary conditions in climate models affect the way that energy is
absorbed or exchanged in the climate system. Boundary conditions are not
predicted by the model and must be specified. Boundary conditions
include solar radiation, atmospheric composition, and land use.

Atmospheric and oceanic circulation develops in response to the
unequal distribution of incoming solar energy across the globe. Climate
models have to account for these circulations. To directly simulate
processes in Earth’s climate system, models use a set of equations that
balance forces acting in three dimensions and conserve mass and track
the temperature of each grid layer. These are the resolved processes.

Processes that operate on a scale smaller than the model grid
must be parameterized. That is, their effect over the entire grid cell
is given by a single value. Examples include the latent heating due to
cumulus convection or the radiative transfer of solar and longwave
radiation.

The components that go into a climate model include an atmosphere
model, ocean model, land model (including snow and land ice), and sea
ice model. A coupler manages the interactions between the different
components, accommodating different grids, resolution, and time steps.

When we simulate the climate system, we want no intrinsic climate
drift in the model. In a process akin to calibrating laboratory
instruments, modelers “tune” the model to achieve a steady-state. To
tune a climate model, modelers vary a parameterization that has a large
effect on the energy budget within the range of observational
uncertainty.

Climate models can be tested in several ways.

1. :mark:`We can develop skill scores, which reduce model biases to a
   single number.`

2. :mark:`We can examine the spatial and temporal distribution of biases
   in model means.`

3. :mark:`We can compare the natural variability in the simulated
   climate with that in the observed climate.`

In the future we expect that increasing computational
capabilities will allow models to be run at increased resolution and
complexity. As model complexity increases, more parameters become
predicted, rather than prescribed. The eventual goal of climate and
weather modelers is to run the most complete models at high resolution
with the most accurate parameterization schemes.

.. _section-19:

**References**
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Climate Change 2007: The Physical Science Basis. Working Group I
Contribution to the Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change, Figure SPM.2. Cambridge University Press.

Hannay, C., D. Williamson, J. Olson, J. Hack and J. Kiehl, R.
Neale and C. Bretherton (2007), Sensitivity to the CAM candidate schemes
in climate and forecast runs along the Pacific Cross-section, CCSM
Atmosphere Model Working Group (AMWG) Meeting, 29-31 January 2007, NCAR,
Boulder, Colorado
`www.cgd.ucar.edu/cms/hannay/publications/AMWG2007.pdf <https://www.meted.ucar.edu/nwp/climate_models/www.cgd.ucar.edu/cms/hannay/publications/AMWG2007.pdf>`__

Hannay, C., R. Neale, and J. Bacmeister (2012), High Resolution
Climate Simulations with the Community Atmospheric Model (CAM), AMS 92th
meeting, New Orleans, 22-26 January 2012.
`www.cgd.ucar.edu/cms/hannay/publications/AMS2012.pdf <https://www.meted.ucar.edu/nwp/climate_models/www.cgd.ucar.edu/cms/hannay/publications/AMS2012.pdf>`__

Jahn, A., and Coauthors, 2012: Late-Twentieth-Century Simulation
of Arctic Sea Ice and Ocean Properties in the CCSM4. *J. Climate*,
**25**, 1431–1452.
http://journals.ametsoc.org/doi/abs/10.1175/JCLI-D-11-00201.1

Landrum, L., B. L. Otto-Bliesner, A. Conley, P. Lawrence, N.
Rosenbloom, and H. Teng.
Last Millennium Climate and Its Variability in CCSM4.
*Journal of Climate Special Issue Collection on CCSM4
*\ http://www.cesm.ucar.edu/publications/jclim10/docs/landrum.ccsm4.last_millennium.pdf

Lawrence, D.M., K.W. Oleson, M.G. Flanner, P.E. Thornton, S.C.
Swenson, P.J. Lawrence, X. Zeng, Z.-L. Yang, S. Levis, K. Sakaguchi,
G.B. Bonan, and A.G. Slater, 2011: Parameterization improvements and
functional and structural advances in version 4 of the Community Land
Model. *J. Adv. Model. Earth Sys*., **3**, DOI: 10.1029/2011MS000045.
http://james.agu.org/index.php/JAMES/article/view/v3n1

Neale, R. B., J. Richter, S. Park, P. H. Lauritzen, S. J. Vavrus,
P. J. Rasch, and M. Zhang.
The Mean Climate of the Community Atmosphere Model (CAM4) in Forced SST
and Fully Coupled Experiments. *J. Climate*, in press.
http://www.cesm.ucar.edu/publications/jclim10/docs/ccsm4.html

Pongratz, J., C. Reick, T. Raddatz, and M. Claussen (2008), A
reconstruction of global agricultural areas and land cover for the last
millennium, *Global Biogeochem. Cycles*, **22**, GB3018.
http://www.agu.org/journals/gb/gb0803/2007GB003153

Teixeira, J., and Coauthors, 2011: Tropical and Subtropical Cloud
Transitions in Weather and Climate Prediction Models: The GCSS/WGNE
Pacific Cross-Section Intercomparison (GPCI). *J. Climate*, **24**,
5223–5256.
http://journals.ametsoc.org/doi/abs/10.1175/2011JCLI3672.1

Trenberth, K.E., J.T. Fasullo, J. Kiehl, 2009: Earth's global
energy budget. *Bull. Amer. Meteor. Soc.*, **90**, 311–323.
http://journals.ametsoc.org/doi/abs/10.1175/2008BAMS2634.1

Trenberth, K.E., J.M. Caron, 2001: Estimates of meridional
atmosphere and ocean heat transports. *J. Climate*, **14**, 3433–3443.
http://journals.ametsoc.org/doi/abs/10.1175/1520-0442%282001%29014%3C3433%3AEOMAAO%3E2.0.CO%3B2

Willis, J. K., D. Roemmich, and B. Cornuelle (2004), Interannual
variability in upper ocean heat content, temperature, and thermosteric
expansion on global scales, *J. Geophys. Res.*, **109**, C12036,
doi:10.1029/2003JC002260.
http://www.agu.org/pubs/crossref/2004/2003JC002260.shtml

.. |CCSM3 Simulation of Water Vapor (white) and Precipitation (orange) for April| image:: media/ch4_popout/image9.jpg
   :width: 5.72917in
   :height: 3.125in
.. |Satellite imagery of the great flood of the Mississippi River, 1993 in the area around St. Louis, MO comparing August 1991 and 1993.| image:: media/ch4_popout/image3.jpg
   :width: 3.77083in
   :height: 4.6875in
.. |Observed Surface Winds, Ocean Temperatures, and Currents across the Equatorial Pacific, Oct 2006 to Sep 2011| image:: media/ch4_popout/image18.jpg
   :width: 6.25in
   :height: 4.16667in
.. |Photo of the Shasta Dam| image:: media/ch4_popout/image30.jpg
   :width: 6.25in
   :height: 4.16667in
.. |Global Energy Flows (W/m2)| image:: media/ch4_popout/image2.jpg
   :width: 6.5in
   :height: 3.65278in
.. |The Tropics defined by upward motion, low pressure, surface winds, and net surface heating| image:: media/ch4_popout/image10.jpg
   :width: 6.5in
   :height: 4.875in
.. |Composite IR Satellite Image Loop 00 UTC 17 Mar 2012 to 12 UTC 20 Mar 2012| image:: media/ch4_popout/image1.jpg
   :width: 6.25in
   :height: 3.75in
.. |Meridional Atmosphere and Ocean Heat Transports| image:: media/ch4_popout/image43.jpg
   :width: 5.20833in
   :height: 4.16667in
.. |Schamatic animation illustrating the difference between initial condition problem (ensemble drift and spread) and boundary condition problem (seasonality)| image:: media/ch4_popout/image4.jpg
   :width: 6.5in
   :height: 3.65278in
.. |animation of Earth orbiting Sun to explain seasons| image:: media/ch4_popout/image22.jpg
   :width: 4.16667in
   :height: 4.16667in
.. |Evolution of a model variable and forecast error during model integration| image:: media/ch4_popout/image8.jpg
   :width: 6.25in
   :height: 3.17708in
.. |Schematic diagram illustrating the difference between weather prediction and climate projection| image:: media/ch4_popout/image27.jpg
   :width: 6.25in
   :height: 2.70833in
.. |Global Volcanic and Solar Forcing 1850-2000 Used in the Third Paleoclimate Model Intercomparison Project (PMIP3)| image:: media/ch4_popout/image31.jpg
   :width: 6.25in
   :height: 3.125in
.. |Photo of Antarctic Ice Core with Prominent Ash Layer| image:: media/ch4_popout/image25.jpg
   :width: 6.25in
   :height: 3.125in
.. |Global Land Use Forcing 1850-2000 Used in the Third Paleoclimate Model Intercomparison Project (PMIP3)| image:: media/ch4_popout/image12.jpg
   :width: 6.25in
   :height: 2.08333in
.. |Global historical cropland area (% of grid cell)| image:: media/ch4_popout/image42.jpg
   :width: 4.6875in
   :height: 3.125in
.. |Global Greenhouse Gas Forcing 1850-2000 Used in the Third Paleoclimate Model Intercomparison Project (PMIP3)| image:: media/ch4_popout/image16.jpg
   :width: 6.25in
   :height: 4.16667in
.. |Photo of ice core section with bubbles| image:: media/ch4_popout/image19.jpg
   :width: 6.25in
   :height: 2.5in
.. |Portraits of Sir Issac Newton, Rudolf Clausius, Arthur Schuster, Lewis Richardson, Vilhelm Bjerknes, John von Neumann| image:: media/ch4_popout/image6.jpg
   :width: 6.25in
   :height: 4.16667in
.. |Gridded globe with zoomed in section| image:: media/ch4_popout/image5.jpg
   :width: 4.16667in
   :height: 4.16667in
.. |Graph showing growth by condensation growth and collision-coalescence growth plus Animation of collision-coalescence| image:: media/ch4_popout/image39.jpg
   :width: 5.20833in
   :height: 3.125in
.. |Loop of schematic images showing the Evolution of Climate Models| image:: media/ch4_popout/image34.jpg
   :width: 6.5in
   :height: 4.06944in
.. |Schamatic animation illustrating the climate model coupler| image:: media/ch4_popout/image37.jpg
   :width: 6.25in
   :height: 4.16667in
.. |Illustration of all processes and physical model elements that are parameterized in numerical weather prediction models. Includes 20 different items, such as topography, deep convection, longwave radiation absorption and emission, microphysical processes, land surface processes and land use types, soil and vegetation processes, snow/water/ice at the earth surface, atmospheric radiation transfer, etc.| image:: media/ch4_popout/image44.jpg
   :width: 5.83333in
   :height: 5.72917in
.. |Processes Simulated by the Parallel Ocean Program| image:: media/ch4_popout/image26.jpg
   :width: 6.5in
   :height: 3.65278in
.. |Processes Simulated by the Community Land Model 4.0| image:: media/ch4_popout/image40.jpg
   :width: 6.25in
   :height: 3.125in
.. |Processes Simulated by the Community Ice CodE| image:: media/ch4_popout/image17.jpg
   :width: 6.25in
   :height: 4.16667in
.. |Processes Simulated by the Community Ice Sheet Model| image:: media/ch4_popout/image13.jpg
   :width: 6.25in
   :height: 4.16667in
.. |Interactive graphic showing relationship between radiative balance and cloud cover| image:: media/ch4_popout/image41.jpg
   :width: 6.5in
   :height: 3.65278in
.. |Summary of the principal components of the radiative forcing of climate change| image:: media/ch4_popout/image33.jpg
   :width: 4.6875in
   :height: 4.6875in
.. |Time series (1981-2006) of Anomaly Correlation of ECMWF 500 hPa Height Forecasts| image:: media/ch4_popout/image28.jpg
   :width: 6.25in
   :height: 4.16667in
.. |Climate Skill Score for Each Version of CCM and CAM, Based on NMSE [normalized mean square error, right] and SVR [scaled variance ratio, left] for the 200-mb Height Field| image:: media/ch4_popout/image15.jpg
   :width: 4.16667in
   :height: 4.16667in
.. |Difference between the SST in observations and (top) 2° run and (bottom) 0.5° run of CCSM4 for 1990-1999| image:: media/ch4_popout/image21.jpg
   :width: 4.16667in
   :height: 4.16667in
.. |Sea Ice Concentration (%) for 1981-2005. Top (a-b): Observed Climatology from SSM/I/SSMR Satellites. Bottom (c-d): Ensemble Mean from CCSM4 Model. Black Line is the Ice Edge from SSM/I/SSMR Data.| image:: media/ch4_popout/image20.jpg
   :width: 5.20833in
   :height: 5.20833in
.. |Global Mean Precipitation and Precipitation Bias in 1-degree and 2-degree CCSM4 Simulations| image:: media/ch4_popout/image7.jpg
   :width: 6.25in
   :height: 4.16667in
.. |Precipitation Bias for GFS 96-120 hr Forecasts, June-August 2010, Relative to CAM-OPI Precipitation from Rain Gauge Observations and Satellite Estimates| image:: media/ch4_popout/image29.jpg
   :width: 6.25in
   :height: 4.16667in
.. |ISCCP Mean Annual Frequency of Cloud Occurrence with Location of Cross Section| image:: media/ch4_popout/image24.jpg
   :width: 6.25in
   :height: 4.6875in
.. |Forecast Error of Temperature and Specific Humidity Showing Rapid Drift Toward Model Climatology| image:: media/ch4_popout/image23.jpg
   :width: 6.25in
   :height: 4.16667in
.. |North Atlantic Oscillation| image:: media/ch4_popout/image32.jpg
   :width: 6.25in
   :height: 3.125in
.. |Positive and negative phases of the wintertime North Atlantic Oscillation (NAO).| image:: media/ch4_popout/image14.jpg
   :width: 6.14583in
   :height: 5in
.. |Photo of Snow in Barcelona, Spain| image:: media/ch4_popout/image36.jpg
   :width: 6.25in
   :height: 4.16667in
.. |Sea-Surface Temperature Anomalies for the NiÃ±o 3.4 Region in Observations, CCSM4 (1Â°), and CCSM3 (T85).| image:: media/ch4_popout/image11.jpg
   :width: 4.16667in
   :height: 4.16667in
.. |Conceptual Model of Earth System Processes Operating on Timescales of Decades to Centuries| image:: media/ch4_popout/image35.jpg
   :width: 6.25in
   :height: 4.6875in
.. |Average Precipitation Rate (mm/day) for North America 1996-2005 from Willmott-Matsuura Climatology and 0.25-degree Resolution CCSM4| image:: media/ch4_popout/image38.jpg
   :width: 4.16667in
   :height: 4.16667in



